What's an HMM?

Do you need to know?

What kinds of questions can you ask even if you don't know what an HMM is?
 - how much of an improvement did they get over previous results?
 - how significant are their results?
 - what kind of information did they use to generate their results?

Hidden Markov Models are a kind of supervised learning technique.  What
that means is that they rely on training a computational model of the
signals with a specific data set, and then applying that trained model
to new data sets.

This is a very common type of machine learning.  Think of it as a big black
box:

  X + [ box ] -> [ trained box ]

  Y -> [ trained box ] -> results

How do you evaluate how well the training worked?

1. Feed in the same data you used to train it; what's the recall like?

  (what's the problem with this approach? overtraining: perfect memory!)

2. Split your data up; use a subset to train, and then evaluate on that.

  (what's the problem with this approach? overtraining; and you only
  detect things you already "know how to find".  the former is a
  technical issue, the latter is methodological.)

3. ???

How do *you* evaluate how well the training worked?

1. Compare to known biological data.

2. Think about other (computational) ways to validate.

3. Compare to experiment.

What ultimately matters?

What *new* information is predicted, and how reliable that new information
is.

---

Sensitivity and specificity:

from Wikipedia, ::

   Sensitivity and specificity are statistical measures of the
   performance of a binary classification test. Sensitivity (also
   called recall rate in some fields) measures the proportion of
   actual positives which are correctly identified as such (e.g. the
   percentage of sick people who are identified as having the
   condition). Specificity measures the proportion of negatives which
   are correctly identified (e.g. the percentage of healthy people who
   are identified as not having the condition).

Specificity:

  true negatives / (true negatives + false positives)

Sensitivity:
  
  true positives / (true positives + false negatives)

---

Is there anything that jumps out at you with respect to gene finding
in microbes vs gene finding in eukaryotes?

---

How to read a paper (30 second tutorial):

in order,

 - read abstract
 - read conclusions
 - understand figures
 - read discussion
 - read methods
